# Competency C

###### tags: `e-portfolio` `competency c` `Randall White`

*Demonstrate strong understanding of security and ethics issues related to informatics, user interface, and inter-professional application of informatics in specific fields by designing and implementing appropriate information assurance and ethics and privacy solutions;*

## Interpretation

Security and privacy in informatics is an important endeavor that must be properly met in order to better protect today’s information systems, and sensitive data (University of Indiana, 2020). Competency C is quintessential to an informaticist because security has to come first in our digital age. Data system breaches, that exposes private information to the public, happen quite often in today’s society. We are averaging over a thousand breaches a year, and they are on the rise primarily due to lapses in security (Clement, 2020). Information security has profound implications in all aspects of modern life, which means informatics professionals must be adept in many skills. Informatic security professionals must understand technical foundations in; designing, implementing, and managing secure information technology systems (University of Indiana, 2020). They must also understand the; social, legislative, and economic considerations that affect the decisions organizations make about their own security (University of Indiana, 2020). Competency C embodies the technical prowess of information security by showcasing strong understandings in security practices and ethical standards related to the study of informatics. 

Competency C to me means; researching new methodologies, staying informed on current security trends, and executing a multitude of security safe guards for information systems. These safe guards constitute: updating and patching information systems, setting up access controls, processing security assessments, using strong passwords, multi-factor authentication for data access, encryption of digital assets, de-identifying personal identifiable information in electronic records, and ensuring compliance with local and national privacy laws. Jason Kaltenbacher of San Jose State University's iSchool proclaims that; "The establishment of effective information security is a complex process, and there are many frameworks and tactics that each organization can utilize to support their unique objectives and goals" (Kaltenbacher, 2019). The propositions contained within competency c stresses that an organization should look at many different avenues to thwart security issues before they become a burden. 

Informatics is a field that has a strong interest in ensuring an organization’s information is fully secure, protected and accounted for (Kaltenbacher, 2019). It is quintessential for an informaticist to embrace information security in any organizational setting. Successful security practices reduces grave risks, and mistakes, that could happen to information resources and information technology infrastructure (Kaltenbacher, 2019). This can include situations that arise from accidentally mismanaging records to intentional malice of electronic records. Competency C details the protection measures involved in informatics. These can reflect an ever-evolving process that incorporates innovative technology as it is developed and implemented, while adapting to compliance requirements that an organization is beholden to, and combating external threats along with their potential impact to the organization (Kaltenbacher, 2019). It is at the utmost importance to place emphasis on making sure authenticity, reliability, and integrity, of electronic records are not at risk.

In my professional career I've had to consistently keep track of modern security practices, and consider user privacy in implementation. At Lawrence Berkeley National Labs, where I was a research assistant, I had a grave security misfortune. I was running a socks proxy server which allowed a researcher from Singapore to work remotely on our systems, and it was not password protected. It was also running on its default network port. Security wasn't being practiced, and within a matter of days we had a large amount of activity on the campus network. It turns out some malicious state actors from China were conducting attacks on our email infrastructure. Our network connection was shut down by the University’s IT department, and we had to do several steps in order to get our network back. We had to; audit our systems, apply anti-virus techniques, put a password and change the port of the proxy service, set up a stringent firewall rules, and patch all of the systems. I had to learn about the latest security needs for an organization then, and I continue to do this now in my current profession. This experience prepared me for competency c because it helped me develop solutions for our own privacy and security issues related to our electronic records on campus at the time.

The course work that I conducted in Information Security Assurance, and Electronic Records Foundations prepared me for competency c. Information Security Assurance taught me how to classify potential security risks in an organizational setting, and devise ways on how to mitigate them. Electronic Records Foundations taught me about the ethics that affect electronic health records, data privacy laws associated with it, and ways to work with confidential protected health information. The lessons in these two classes granted me the ability to practice the core themes of competency c.

## Supporting Evidence

I have gathered two pieces of evidence that details my comprehension of Competency C in the best possible light. I created a risk assessment, in the first piece, in order to process information assurance and privacy solutions to the assessment. I created security safeguards in the second piece of evidence by making sure I complied with privacy concerns of HIPPA, and other types of legislation.

### INFM 208 – Information Security Assurance – Risk Assessment: Part 2 – Link

I conducted a risk assessment. of my personal property for Information Security Assurance. A risk assessment is a process where you classify risk factors of information assets and identify hazards that can cause harm through the exploitation, or misuse of system security. You identify the assets you have, the type of risks and vulnerabilities that could happen to them, and then plot the total perceived damage that can occur if security is compromised in any fashion. You then propose the controls to the risks of the assets in the assessments. It is pertinent for all organizations to conduct a risk assessment in order to conduct information security properly.

### INFM 206 – Information Security Assurance – Class Project – Link

I created a project, for Information Security Assurance, called MyHealthUHN. Although the project was created to embrace big data through the use of electronic health records, I had to frame security as a priority. I proposed an accessible database that contained secondary data to allow researchers to conduct analysis on user surveys. The data is only connected to a patients electronic health record through a specialized unique identifier number created for the database itself. Outside of this identifier, the data is anonymous. This was selected due to privacy laws such as the GDPR and HIPAA. The project was also set up inside of a virtual machine, and utilized OpenBSD operating system. The virtual machine and operating system are practices put in to place that would make it near impossible for an attacker to penetrate the system. This project taught me that secure electronic health records is the only way to conduct a health informatics project in any shape or fashion. Security first before anything.

## Conclusion

Competency C may not seem like a profound ingredient to the study of Informatics, but it is incredibly important. It is a requirement, especially now, for informatics projects to be secured from the ground up. Conducting a risk assessment should be one of the initial procedures in how an informaticist secures information systems. After a risk assessment, the structure of security within a project should be thoroughly addressed by researching the latest methods and keeping up to date with current security fixes for computing systems. Both of these endeavors encompasses the entirety of competency c. They are not mutually exclusive. These two factors that sum up competency c should always be enforced. As stated by Oachs & Watters; “Secondary data will need to remove identifying data so that data can be used without violating the patient’s privacy” (Oachs & Watters, 2016).

## References

*University of Indiana. (2020). Security Informatics. Retrieved September 28, 2020, from 	https://informatics.indiana.edu/programs/phd-informatics/security-informatics.html*

*Kaltenbacher, J. (2019). Informatics Foundations.*

*Clement, J. (2020, March 10). U.S. data breaches and exposed records 2019. Retrieved September 28, 	2020, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/273550/data-breaches-recorded-in-the-united-	states-by-number-of-breaches-and-records-exposed/*

*Oachs, P. K., & Watters, A. (2016). Health information management: concepts, principles, and practice. 	Chicago, IL: AHIMA, American Health Information Management Association.*