# Competency E

###### tags: `e-portfolio` `competency e` `Randall White`

*Work collaboratively in teams and use project management practices effectively to solve user-centric information and data problems;*

## Interpretation

Informatics has a strong focus on the human use of computing which helps people interact with technology in the best and most efficient way possible (Indiana University, 2020). Informatics endeavors work to bridge computing to the human condition. Yet this functionality isn’t only in its technological foundations. Informatics thrives on human collaboration in order to efficiently fulfill an organization’s mission. Competency E is the use of collaboration, along with project management tools, to fulfill informatics-based data driven application for some kind of entity. Projects have a specific scope which defines what will be completed within the project’s duration (Sengstack et al., 2015). The scope drives the work needed to be done and has to be closely managed in order to complete the project successfully (Sengstack et al., 2015). Project management is a series of activities embodied in a process of completing objectives in a project by working with team members and other stakeholders to attain; an ideal project schedule, low costs and overhead, and high end technical performance objectives (Cleland & Ireland, 2006). Project management in informatics also allows for review meetings that continuously confirms the project’s alignment with the businesses strategy (Sengstack et al., 2015). It is imperative to utilize project management fundamentals, thus Competency E, when creating solutions with the use of information systems.

Competency E, to me, means to collaborate with team members while utilizing modern informatics tools on projects. It also means to track and manage an informatics project using modern project management practices. Informatics projects need to utilize cloud technologies like; email to communicate, calendaring systems to schedule tasks, source code repositories to keep track of software changes, and web conference software for having weekly stand up meetings. The most important project management principle for informatics is Agile. Agile project management is an iterative approach to managing software projects that focuses on continuous releases by incorporating customer feedback with every iteration (Atlassian, 2020). Informatics teams that embrace Agile methodologies increase their development speed, expand collaboration, and foster the ability to better respond to market trends (Atlassian, 2020). Competency E, in terms of technology use, is much more vast than how it presents itself.

The field of informatics is concerned with building innovative information tools and applications that captures, as well as analyze data (Indiana University, 2020). These actions create a competitive advantage for an organization or individual (Indiana University, 2020). Collaboration, and project management methodologies, have the capabilities to make an informatics endeavor; faster, feature rich, increase in productivity, and mitigate failure. An informaticist must also be responsible, as a project manager, to see that the scope of work is done on time (Sengstack et al., 2015). These professionals must also be on budget, and meet or defy the defined expectations with quality to fulfill this innovation (Sengstack et al., 2015). Competency E signifies that an informaticist can adapt to any situation to deliver a quality product.

I’ve had to use modern collaboration tools and project management techniques to efficiently conduct many aspects of my current professional career. I recently have been an avid user of Trello, the Agile kanban listing tool, to keep track of changes that I have been making to information systems that I manage. This made me make better decisions in system administration, and easily estimate how a project is coming along over time. I use zoom very often to touch base with colleagues, as well as business shareholders weekly. These collaborations help fill in details of the progress of many projects, and develop key collaboration strategies going forward. I use the Google suite to schedule meetings, and to keep track of project time lines, and develop internal documentation collaboratively with other employees within my organization. Cloud collaborative tools are essential for me too for conducting modern informatics related work. The work experience that I have enveloped signifies the core aptitudes of competency e through project management utilities and collaboration. 

The mini-project that I undertook in my Big Data Analytics and Management class allowed me to explore the attributes of competency e. I worked within a group of three individuals with many different experience levels. We did exploratory data analysis to show trends, and future inferences concerning Covid-19's affect on the economy. We had two stand up meetings a week, a tactic used in Agile project management to define problems for individuals to work on at the beginning of the week and then report the outcome at the end. We collaborated through the myriad of Google suite applications like; Docs, Drive, Slides, Calendar, Chat and Meet. These tools were used to coordinate the project, schedule specific time lines and goals, as well as collaborate on the documents that we turned in to our professor. This experience is exactly what Competency E frames as prime objectives in working collaboratively in teams, along with the use of project management practices effectively to solve problems.

## Supporting Evidence

I have two pieces of evidence from the Big Data Analytics and Management Mini-project that details the core aptitudes of Competency E. Both pieces utilized project management practices, and collaborative team work to find insight into a specific problem domain.


### INFM 203 – Big Data Analytics and Management – Mini Project Report – Link

This piece of evidence is important because it took the full description of Competency E, and forged it into reality. The project began with setting up meetings through Google calendar, and objective time lines of where wanted to the project to be at in specific time points. We then had two weekly stand up meetings where we discussed working on different key elements of the project. I was tasked with doing statistical time series analysis on Covid-19 death rates in correlation to the economy. We were able to convene the project on time. We then collaborate on the final document, through Google Docs, that is on display in this piece of evidence. We used modern informatics collaboration techniques in producing the final report, and we used project management in scheduling the time line for the project, and different pieces of work that our team needed to produce. This fits entirely into the core of competency e.


### INFM 203 – Big Data Analytics and Management – Mini Project Presentation – Link

I chose this portion of the mini project, as evidence, because it required collaboration, and project management techniques for completion. It was after our team finished the exploratory data analysis report, and had another stand up meeting before we set foot to finish the presentation. We communicated through Google meetup and set the completion time lines in Google calendar. Once we were able to sketch out what we needed, we collaborated together simultaneously using the Canva cloud graphic design platform to generate a power point presentation that was displayed to the entire class before our final. This adds on to the work done in the report, and fully shows that we had undertook great mastery in competency e.


## Conclusion

Competency E embodies the human aspect in the field of informatics. Collaborating on projects in a team, while utilizing project management techniques greatly optimizes human productivity. Competency E has taught me that informatics projects thrive on collaboration, either with colleagues or through feedback from shareholders of an organization. To build a solid return on investment requires products, and services to be produced as fast as possible. Without modern collaboration and project management, these ideals could become stagnant. The worse is that the project could actually become costly to an organization due to missed deadlines. It is critical for an informaticist to fully appreciate, and practice the qualities of Competency E. It is important for the human component of informatics to connect people not only through the technology presented, but the work behind scenes also.

## References

*Cleland, D., & Ireland, L. (2006). Project management: Strategic design and implementation (5th ed., AccessEngineering). New York: McGraw-Hill.*

*Atlassian. (2020). Get started with agile project management. Retrieved September 14, 2020, from https://www.atlassian.com/agile/project-management*

*Sengstack, P., Boicey, C., & Sigma Theta Tau International, issuing body. (2015). Mastering informatics: A healthcare handbook for success. Indianapolis, IN: Sigma Theta Tau International, Honor Society for Nursing®.*