# Conclusion
###### tags: `e-portfolio` `conclusion` `Randall White`

I recall a little over a year ago when I discovered the Informatics program at San Jose State University. I searched online for different Masters programs to further my education, and knowledge. I then stumbled upon a website for this program out of 15 search pages on Google. I did not realize it was a brand new program and it was just starting up. I didn’t even think I would make it, but I am glad I registered because I was admitted. I knew very little about information and library science. I came from a quantitative background with my Bachelor degree in Statistics, as well as my Associate degree in Computer Programming. I did not understand the legal, organizational, management and people aspect of informatics or information systems. Though after a year I can say I learned quite a bit.

Informatics thrives on the people behind the systems, and that is the biggest thing that I took away from the program. People are the most important part. Whether its; addressing privacy needs, having someone input metadata into a DAM system, or structuring a user experience based upon user profiles- people entirely take center stage in the program.

The strengths that I thoroughly take away from have to do with; starting, managing, and conducting advanced informatics projects within a group setting. I am better able to scope a project, list its requirements, and speculate its data needs. I can more efficiently create high functioning prototypes, and anticipate user needs for applications. I have learned many new techniques, and tools in keeping track of projects, all due to the program in Informatics. I also have a new found respect and knowledge of privacy along with information security, due to the program. This has allowed me to make better business decisions as an IT professional. I also feel that the combination of my Statistics background with this program may have made me management material at my place of employment. I am truly appreciative of what I have learned in Informatics.

I plan on continuing my education, and learning in the Information sciences by progressing in to Academia. My professional plan includes undertaking a community college teaching certificate, that entails an internship, so I may use my education to teach at the community college level. I am also looking forward to obtaining a Ph. D in Informatics or Information Systems to go the route of being a research professor at a major University. I have been a research assistant, and staff at Universities in my professional career and I want to change that to being a full time faculty member. 

I really enjoyed my time as a student in the Informatics program of the School of Information at San Jose State University. I look forward to advancing my career with the skills that I have obtained within the program. I feel that this program is beneficial for anyone who wants to efficiently foray in to Information technology. I highly recommend the lessons learned in Informatics.
